---
layout: page
---

Here are some projects that Rio Grande Waves are proposing. 

- Project: Trickle charging the aquifer
  - We propose a simple project : to maintain low-level flows in the Rio Grande outside of the irrigation season that will recharge the aquifer through the river channel, support native habitat, while at the same time keeping all of the water in New Mexico in an efficient storage location ... the aquifer.  At the WRRI workshop, it was stated that the most effective location to recharge the aquifer is through the river channel. The best native habitat is also located along the river channel; however, the ability to restore habitat is severely limited by the lack of water in the river for a large fraction of the year. Given drought and surface water shortage, farmers irrigate predominantly from the aquifer. Finally, evaporative losses from the aquifer are negligible and far less than from a reservoir.
We propose that low level in-stream flows be maintained year-round to achieve these goals. When there is no requirement for downstream delivery, the flows should be reduced to a minimum, but non-zero, level, and can be adjusted such that water flows no farther than the state line. The goal is for all of the water that is released off-season to trickle down into the aquifer and to support habitat along the river corridor.

- Issue: USIBWC Canalization Project to cease annual mowing of 2850 acres of the floodway.

  - USIBWC to cease mowing 2850 acres of the floodway between the flood control levees in the USIBWC Canalization Project and utilize cut-stump treatment or other saltcedar control/removal in the entire floodway between the levees. Exceptions to No-Mow Zones to include those listed under Sec. 2.3.7 Exceptions to No-Mow Zones, USIBWC Canalization River Management Plan. See also Sec. 2.3.11 Hydraulic Analysis of No-Mow Zones, USIBWC Canalization River Management Plan . See also Sec. 2.4 Invasive Species Management, USIBWC Canalization River Management Plan.  Currently, USIBWC mows the floodway to control weed, brush and tree growth and is conducted at least once a year. Often, mowing results in soil disturbance and contributes to dust and soil erosion. Farm tractors with 20-foot rotary mowers are generally used to mow floodways. Some areas are mowed twice if vegetation is dense.  Cessation of all mowing in the floodway along with selective treatment of exotic vegetation, will allow native vegetation to establish itself for the improvement and restoration of riparian habitats benefiting native riparian birds. This project will promote the growth of target species including: Goodding’s willow (Salix gooddingii), Cottonwood (Populus deltoides ssp), Coyote willow (Salix exiqua), Alkali sacaton (Sporobolus airoides), pale wolfberry (Lycium pallidum), four‐wing saltbush (Altriplex canescens), screwbean mesquite (Prosopis pubescens), arrow weed (Pluchea sericea), three‐leaf sumac (Chilopsis linearis), and inland saltgrass (Distichlis spicata).  Native vegetation can slow overland sheetflow from storm events and allow aquifer recharge.  Native vegetation can also decrease sedimentation in the river. 

- Issue: Completely phase out grazing lease program within USIBWC
  - Canalization Project and remove trespass livestock from USIBWC Restoration Sites including Crow Canyon A &amp; B (total 115.6 acres) Description of Issue: Per the 2009 Record of Decision for Management of the Canalization Project, USIBWC is not renewing grazing leases and the grazing leas program is currently being phased out. See Sec. 2.10, Leased Areas/Areas Maintained by Non-USIBWC Entities, USIBWC Canalization River Management Plan . However one lease remains, approximately one mile downstream of Mesilla Dam on the east side of the river and extends to Santo Tomas Highway Bridge. Also, trespass cattle are grazing on USIBWC restoration sites including Crow Canyon A &amp;B. Crow Canyon B is a restoration site designated for 10.6 acres of flycatcher habitat. Livestock grazing can put intense pressure on native grasses resulting in their replacement with non-palatable invasive plants and suppress woody plant regeneration thus preventing natural renewal of riparian bird habitat. Livestock grazing can also denude soils and trample streambanks increasing sedimentation in the river. Flycatcher habitat quality is threatened by many anthropogenic factors including livestock grazing which can alter plant community structure, species composition, relative abundance of species, and alter stream channel morphology. May also increase cowbird populations. See Sec. 3.1.2.3 Threats &amp; Table 3-3, USIBWC Canalization River Management Plan .

- Implementation of nine IBWC aquatic habitat restoration sites
  - USIBWC developed nine conceptual designs for aquatic restoration projects to implement aquatic habitat, wetland and riparian habitat restoration including at the mouths of five arroyos: Yeso Arroyo, Angostura Arroyo, Broad Canyon Arroyo, Trujillo Arroyo .  Five alternatives were found to have no significant impact, four of which are located in New Mexico, but to date have not been constructed: Broad Canyon Arroyo, Las Cruces Effluent, Mesilla Valley Bosque State Park, and Montoya Intercepting Drain. Final FONSI, EA Aquatic Habitat Restoration Rio Grande Canalization Project, October 2021.  Native plantings at aquatic restoration habitat sites would replace existing vegetation community types dominated by invasive species, such as saltcedar, with community types dominated by native riparian vegetation. Planting herbaceous wetland species would diversify vegetation community types present in the floodplains for all action alternatives Therefore, restoring native vegetation would provide long-term beneficial impacts for both aquatic and riparian habitat.  Habitat in the RGCP is used by numerous migratory birds (Yong and Finch 1996, Finch and Yong 2000, USIBWC 2004). The Rio Grande is a major migratory flyway for numerous bird species, particularly waterfowl, shorebirds, and those associated with riparian habitats.  Establishing native riparian trees and shrubs would provide nesting and roosting habitat.  Revegetation would help stabilize the bank, prevent bank erosion and provide levee protection and some sites would have a beneficial localized impact on flood control as a result of creating additional water storage capacity or enabling local inundation during high-flow periods as well as improve stormwater and floodwater conveyance from upland areas.  

- Project: Swan Pond
  - Wetland and riparian habitat occupy less than 1% of New Mexico’s arid landscape, but sustain a disproportionately large number of New Mexico’s wildlife including 80% of all sensitive vertebrate species at some stage in their life cycle (NMDGF 2006: 219-20).  Over the last century, 90 percent of riparian ecosystems statewide and 87 percent of wetland acreage along the Rio Grande have been lost (NMDGF 2006: 218, 223). The Rio Grande reach below Elephant Butte and Caballo reservoirs has experienced the greatest impacts to its geomorphology, hydrology and biology of the entire New Mexico portion of the Rio Grande (Fullerton and Batts 2003: 30).  Broad Canyon Ranch includes 42 acres within the floodplain west of the highway including a 30 acre semipermanent emergent wetland, also known as Swan Pond, which is dominated by a monoculture of cattail (Typha spp.) with saltcedar (Tamarix spp.) (12 acres) around the fringes. The actions proposed will focus on aquifer recharge of stormwater and high river flows through surface water reconnection to the Rio Grande, reduce damage from flooding and restore 30 acres of semi-permanent wetland by controlling invasive plants and influencing a hydraulic regime more favorable for a diverse composition of wetland plant species. The goal of these actions is to restore native wetlands for feeding, nesting and stopover habitat for migratory birds of the Middle Rio Grande Valley corridor, other resident birds as well as other wetland obligate and associated wildlife species. Areas in close juxtaposition that will benefit from proposed project activities will include the wetland transitional areas as well as the adjacent Chihuahuan Desert scrub.

- Project: Enhance and/or Expand USIBWC existing riparian restoration project
  - USIBWC has implemented twenty-seven restoration sites as of December 2012 pursuant to the Conceptual Restoration Plan and Cumulative Effects Analysis for the Rio Grande ‐Caballo Dam to American Dam, New Mexico and the updated Site Implementation Plans ‐ Rio Grande Canalization Project River Restoration Implementation Plan (TRC 2011). See Sec. 2.6 Restoration Sites, USIBWC Rio Grande Canalization Project River Management Plan .  Several projects have not been restored to their full potential, maintained to their full potential or received supplemental irrigation. See Table 2-2 Restoration Sites Requiring Water Rights for Offset of Net Depletions or Recommended Supplemental Irrigation, USIBWC Rio Grande Canalization Project River Management Plan. Some projects could be expanded in size and scope to achieve their goals and objectives consistent with Conceptual Restoration Plan and the DRE Project Initiative. USIBWC aims to establish a minimum of 53.5 acres (21.7 ha) of flycatcher breeding habitat by 2017, and as many as 119 acres (48 ha) by 2019, as stipulated in RPM 1. To date, only a fraction of acres of flycatcher breeding habitat have been established.  Per Table 1 of USIBWC Progress Report to USFWS on USIBWC Restoration Activities Per 2017 Biological Opinion Reasonable and Prudent Measures, Progress Report #6, April 2022- March 2023, a total of 94.8 acres of flycatcher habitat were targeted out of a total of 508.4 total restored acres. To date, only 16.2 acres of flycatcher habitat have achieved the status of Class 3 (moderately suitable) to Class 5 (highly suitable) southwestern willow flycatcher habitat.  Per USIBWC Progress Report#6, the Record of Decision committed the USIBWC to establish an Environmental Water Transaction Program (EWTP) (RPM 1.3 and 1.4) and acquire or lease 450 acre- feet of water annually and up to 227 acre-feet of supplemental irrigation. To date, USIBWC has acquired 47.36 acres (approximately 143.2 acre-feet), representing approximately 21% of ROD-required water rights.  In 2022, the USIBWC delivered supplemental irrigation water to four of the five sites but not the full EBID allotment. Only a total of 16.35 ac-ft, out of an available 23.68 ac-ft allotment, across 4 sites were used.

- Project: Construction of riparian restoration and highflow stormwater capture and aquifer recharge sites at all EBID Wasteways within the Elephant Butte Irrigation
District.
  - Enhancing overbank flooding conditions to support native riparian vegetation generally involves lowering the bank elevations or lowering the floodplain surface. Another option would be to use supplemental water to inundate the site. The numerous Elephant Butte Irrigation District wasteways or drain returns within this reach provide opportunities for the application of high surface flows and stormwater flows or other water to promote the development of riparian vegetation as well as slow down high surface flows and flood water to promote aquifer recharge adjacent to the Rio Grande. A restoration site at the Leasburg Extension Lateral Wasteway 8 was constructed and restored by the USIBWC as part of the current River Management Plan of the Rio Grande Canalization Project, Sec. 2.6, Site #18. It uses a check structure and overbank grading design. See photos of completed Leasburg Extension Lateral Wasteway 8 prototype here. See original conceptual restoration plan and cumulative effects analysis here. The final location of these sites should be selected in coordination with EBID engineers.

- Issue: Lower Rio Grande Youth Conservation Corps
  - A Lower Rio Grande Youth Conservation Corps program could be established to partner with public land management agencies with DRE Project Region undertaking DRE Projects. Public land management agencies with possible DRE Projects include NM State Parks, USIBWC, Dona Ana County Flood Control, Bureau of Reclamation Bureau of Land Management and Elephant Butte Irrigation District. The purpose of the Lower Rio Grande YCC would be to assist with maintenance and long term monitoring and management of DRE projects as well as engage young people in the outdoors, empowering them to use their strengths and potential to lead healthy, productive lives, building resiliency in themselves, their communities and ecosystems through teamwork, service and experiential education. A Lower Rio Grande Youth Conservation Corps could be modeled after any of the regional or state Youth Conservation Corps including the Rocky Mountain Youth Corps, based in Colorado. See https://www.rockymountainyouthcorps.org/


- Issue: Environmental Flow Assessment and Recommendations for the Lower Rio Grande from Elephant Butte Dam to the NM-TX State Line
  - Similar to the environmental flow analyses that were conducted as part of the Rio Grande Basin Study, a WaterSMART-funded initiative led by the US Bureau of Reclamation and the Middle Rio Grande Conservancy to develop management strategies to build resilience for the Rio Grande in New Mexico under different climate-warming scenarios, a working group should be created to put forward environmental flow recommendations for the Rio Grande within the DRE Project region including at least five study reaches from Elephant Butte Dam to the NM-TX state line. E-flow recommendations would be based on flow needs of a targeted group of indicator species associated with the study reaches. E-flow recommendations would describe discharge requirements associated with four central parts of the annual hydrograph: spring pulse flows, which are presented as high, medium and low magnitudes; monsoon flushing flows, spring-summer low flow and fall-winter low flow The e-flow assessment would include at least three phases: (1) Phase I: Orientation Meeting with key stakeholders and hydro-ecological experts familiar with the reach to build consensus around the goal of the e-flow assessment and clarify process and deliverables and to discuss and agree upon list of indicator species for each study reach; ( 2) Phase II: Prepare Summary Report identifying 3-5 ‘indicator species’ and recommending specific flow needs, with particular emphasis on low flows as well as spring pulse flows as described further below.  Summarize flow needs of indicator species: Gather, synthesize, organize, and summarize available data and info describing flow and habitat needs of the indicator species (sources include indicator species experts, grey literature, peer-reviewed literature, etc.).  Summarize biophysical conditions of reach: Gather, synthesize, organize and summarize available data and literature describing current and past river conditions, particularly as they relate to streamflow and water table levels, channel morphology, water quality, aquatic and riparian habitat as well as the main drivers of change that precipitated the river’s hydro- ecological decline (sources include experts, grey literature, peer-reviewed literature, etc.).  Conduct analysis of available discharge data with a focus on parts of the annual hydrograph of during April-May snowmelt/flood period as well as critical low-flow months of both spring- summer (months of Aug and Sept) and fall-winter (Oct - Jan) periods.  Summarize water management and use along each study reach: where does the water go, how is the water managed in space and time, and how does Rio Grande Compact influence water deliveries at the state line.  Summarize main challenges and opportunities for implementing flow recommendations.  (3) Phase III: Workshop to Discuss Findings and Constraints/Opportunities for implementing the report’s recommendations. which would entail distributing report prior to workshop and invite comments; Identify key action steps toward implementation; and Modify final summary report to reflect workshop discussions and comments Costs would need to cover consultants as well as meetings or workshops such as meeting space rental, food, etc.

- Issue: GIS Database to Optimize Multiple Benefits from Voluntary Fallowing of Irrigated Acreage
  - GIS database and analysis to strategically target voluntary temporary fallowing of irrigated acreage in Elephant Butte Irrigation District based on location on EBID water infrastructure, grouping of acreage along EBID water infrastructure, size of acreage, crop type, soil type, location of groundwater recharge, proximity to and grouping along river corridor and floodway, proximity to and grouping along restoration sites and sensitive environmental areas. Multiple benefits of temporary fallowing of irrigated acreage can be achieved beyond total acreage fallowed from development of a GIS database and strategic, targeted scaling of incentives to private landowners. Currently, voluntary temporary fallowing is open to all EBID irrigators regardless of characteristics of land to be fallowed resulting in missed opportunity to optimize multiple beneficial outcomes from a voluntary temporary fallowing program funded with public taxpayer dollars.  

-Project: Voluntary fallowing of ground and surface water irrigated agriculture within the Caballo Watershed along ephemeral stream systems that flow into Caballo Reservoir including Percha Creek, Las Animas Creek, Seco Creek and Palomas Creek
  - Voluntary fallowing of ground and surface water irrigated agriculture along the ephemeral stream systems that flow into Caballo Reservoir can both increase stream flow into Caballo Reservoir and subsequent water availability for the Rio Grande Project as well as riparian habitat along the stream systems and at the mouths of the stream systems in the Caballo Reservoir creating and enhancing Class 2 to Class 5 habitat suitability for federally endangered Southwestern Willow Flycatcher and federally threatened. Yellow-billed Cuckoo. See Western Yellow-billed Cuckoo Habitat Classification 2023, Lower Rio Grande from Elephant Butte Dam to American Diversion Dam, New Mexico Upper Colorado Basin Region, Technical Report No. ENV-2023-097, US Bureau of Reclamation, U.S. Department of the Interior, October 2023 and Southwestern Willow Flycatcher Habitat Classification 2023, Lower Rio Grande from Elephant Butte Dam to American Diversion Dam, New Mexico Upper Colorado Basin Region, Technical Report No.  ENV 2023-096, US Bureau of Reclamation, U.S. Department of the Interior, October 2023. 
